A87570,A ministers mite cast into the stocke of a weake memory: helpt by rules and experiments. VVith a winter night schoole tutoring discourse to generous youth.,"Jerome, Stephen, fl. 1604-1650.",Printed by T H and are to be sold by John Saywell at the Greyhound in Little Brittaine,London,1650,"Catechisms, English --  Early works to 1800."
    <P>Eightly, you told mee, for remembring other Classicall Authours, whether divine or humane; it was most profitable to ex∣tract the very marrow and quintessence of them into short Epitomes and Abridge∣ments, as some have abridged <HI>Calvins</HI> In∣stitutions, and some Master <HI>Rogers</HI> his Di∣rectories, as <HI>Lucius Florus, Livies</HI> Histo∣ry.</P>
A97256,"The people's impartiall, and compassionate monitor; about hearing of sermons: or, The worlds preachers and proselites lively painted out, for a person of quality; upon occasion of hearing two famous divines, whose transcendent wit, oratorie, and elegancie, made many at their wits end with admiration! Being a rare discovery to vndeceive the deceiver. / By R. Younge of Roxwell in Essex.","Younge, Richard.",Printed by J B for James Crumpe in Little Bartholomews Well yard,London,1657,Preaching --  Early works to 1800.
    <P><HI>Obj.</HI> But thy Sermons are only stuft with Authorities from the <HI>Ancient Fathers, Philosophers,</HI> &amp;c. and what more commendable, than sweet and sententious sayings?</P>
A93345,"England and Scotland united, disjoyned. Or, A gentle corosive, and healing plaister, applied to two dying kingdoms: with some balsamum for wounded Ireland; humbly presented to both kingdoms, and communicated to all good subjects, that wish peace and good to the kingdoms, or to either of them. Wherein is represented, the grievances of the people, and their several murmurings. By Ethog Grimes Gent.","Smith, George, 1602 or 3-1658.",Printed for Laurence Chapman and are to be sold at his shop next door to the Fountain Tavern in the Strand near the Savoy,London,1648,Great Britain --  Politics and government --  1642-1649 --  Early works to 1800.; Scotland --  Politics and government --  1642-1649 --  Early works to 1800.; England --  Foreign relations --  Scotland --  Early works to 1800.; Scotland --  Foreign relations --  England --  Early works to 1800.
    <P>When the sins of an impenitent people provoke God, to bring destroying judgements upon that nation, he withdraws his com∣mon restraining grace from men, and leaves them to their own lusts (he will punish sin with sin) wicked men shall act according to their own several lusts, and grow more wicked, oppressing, kil∣ling and reviling one another, till they be like <HI>Judea</HI> and <HI>Jerusalem,</HI> <NOTE PLACE="marg">Vid. Jo∣sep. bel. Jud. lib. 6. &amp; lib. 7</NOTE> destroyed one by another, and at last made a spoil and a prey to the enemy: When a lying spirit is put into the mouth of a Ministery, as in <HI>Ahabs</HI> 400. prophets, expect speedy ruine and desolations; or if men and Armies will go against the word of God pro∣nounced by the mouth of Gods messengers, they are not likely to prosper, but like <HI>Ahab</HI> miscarry in their confidence; but to all that are godly, and of upright hearts, I say with the Prophet, <HI>Fear</HI> <NOTE PLACE="marg">Isa. 45. 4.</NOTE> <HI>not, be strong, behold your God will come with vengeance, even God, with a recompence he will come and save you:</HI> This is the time of Gods indignation, he will punish the <HI>Inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity, the earth shall also disclose her bloods, and shall no more cover her slain, it will be but for a moment</HI> (the time is appointed by God) <HI>and the indignation shall be overpast: Believe in the Lord</HI> <NOTE PLACE="marg">2 Chro. 20. 20.</NOTE> <HI>your God, so shall you be established; believe his Prophets, so shall you prosper.</HI></P>

A42237,"The most excellent Hugo Grotius, his three books treating of the rights of war & peace in the first is handled, whether any war be just : in the second is shewed, the causes of war, both just and unjust : in the third is declared, what in war is lawful, that is, unpunishable : with the annotations digested into the body of every chapter / translated into English by William Evats ...","Grotius, Hugo, 1583-1645.; Evats, William.",Printed by M W for Thomas Basset and Ralph Smith,London,1682,International law.; War (International law)

A12767,"The art of logick deliuered in the precepts of Aristotle and Ramus. VVherein 1. The agreement of both authors is declared. 2. The defects in Ramus, are supplyed, and his superfluities pared off, by the precepts of Aristotle. 3. The precepts of both, are expounded and applyed to vse, by the assistance of the best schoolemen. By Tho: Spencer.","Spencer, Thomas, fl. 1628-1629.",Printed by Iohn Dawson for Nicholas Bourne at the south entrance of the Royall Exchange,London,1628,"Ramus, Petrus, 1515-1572.; Aristotle.; Logic --  Early works to 1800."

B00963,"An encouragement to colonies. By Sir William Alexander, knight..","Stirling, William Alexander, Earl of, 1567 or 8-1640.; Stansby, William, fl. 1597-1638, printer.",Printed by William Stansby,London,1625,"Colonies --  History --  17th century --  Early works to 1800.; America --  History --  1492-1763 --  Early works to 1800.; Canada --  History --  To 1760 --  Early works to 1800.; Great Britain --  History --  Charles I, 1625-1649."

A15677,"The vvonders of this windie winter By terrible stormes and tempests, to the losse of liues and goods of many thousands of men, women and children. The like by sea and land, hath not beene seene, nor heard of in this age or the world.",Anonymous,Printed by G Eld for Iohn Wright and are to bee sold at his shop in Christ Church dore,London,1613,Storms --  England --  Early works to 1800.; Winter storms --  Early works to 1800.

A26718,"The good womans champion, or, A defence for the weaker vessell being fit for widdowes, wives, maidens, or others to read or heare : wherein is vindicated the bitter reproaches, scandalous writings of some fantastick men against poor, harmlesse women and maides, with a carefull wives good counsell to a carelesse, bad husband / by I.A.",I. A.,Printed for Francis Grove,London,1650,Feminism --  Early works to 1800.

A05320,"Characterismi: or, Lentons leasures Expressed in essayes and characters, neuer before written on. By F.L. Gent.","Lenton, Francis, fl. 1630-1640.",Printed by I ohn B eale for Roger Michell,London,1631,Characters and characteristics --  Early works to 1800.


A65881,"The Quakers plainness detecting fallacy in two short treatises : I. The first in answer to an abusive epistle, styl'd, The Quakers quibbles, and the comparison therein between the Muggletonians and the Quakers, proved absurd and unjust, II. The second, being a brief impeachment of the forger's compurgators (in their Quakers appeal answered) whose injustice, partiality and false glosses have given the chief occasion of these late contests / by George Whitehead.","Whitehead, George, 1636?-1723.",s n,London printed,1674,"T. T. --  (Thomas Thomson), fl. 1668. --  Quakers quibbles.; Hicks, Thomas, 17th cent. --  Quakers appeal answer'd.; Society of Friends --  Apologetic works.; Muggletonians --  Controversial literature."

A51181,"Essays of Michael, seigneur de Montaigne in three books, with marginal notes and quotations of the cited authors, and an account of the author's life / new rendered into English by Charles Cotton, Esq.","Montaigne, Michel de, 1533-1592.; Cotton, Charles, 1630-1687.",Printed for T Basset and M Gilliflower and W Hensman,London,1685,"Montaigne, Michel de, 1533-1592."

A58041,"Mercurius Rusticus, or, The countries complaint of the barbarous outrages committed by the sectaries of this late flourishing kingdom together with a brief chronology of the battels, sieges, conflicts, and other most remarkable passages, from the beginning of this unnatural war, to the 25th of March, 1646.","Barwick, John, 1612-1664. Querela Cantabrigiensis.; Ryves, Bruno, 1596-1677.; Wharton, George, Sir, 1617-1681. Mercurius Belgicus.",Printed for R Royston and are to be sold by R Green,London,1685,"Great Britain --  History --  Civil War, 1642-1649."

A50948,The readie and easie vvay to establish a free commonwealth and the excellence therof compar'd with the inconveniences and dangers of readmitting kingship in this nation / the author J.M.,"Milton, John, 1608-1674.",Printed for the author,London,1660,"State, The.; Great Britain --  Politics and government --  1649-1660.; Great Britain --  History --  Commonwealth and Protectorate, 1649-1660."

A44287,"The primitive origination of mankind, considered and examined according to the light of nature written by the Honourable Sir Matthew Hale, Knight ...","Hale, Matthew, Sir, 1609-1676.",Printed by William Godbid for William Shrowsbery,London,1677,Human beings --  Origin.; Spontaneous generation.
A43281,"The paradoxal discourses of F.M. Van Helmont concerning the macrocosm and microcosm, or, The greater and lesser world and their union set down in writing by J.B. and now published.","Helmont, Franciscus Mercurius van, 1614-1699.; J. B.",Printed by J C and Freeman Collins for Robert Kettlewel,London,1685,Microcosm and macrocosm --  Early works to 1800.; Science --  Early works to 1800.

A01545,"Of the nature and vse of lots a treatise historicall and theologicall; written by Thomas Gataker B. of D. sometime preacher at Lincolnes Inne, and now pastor of Rotherhith.","Gataker, Thomas, 1574-1654.",Printed by Edward Griffin and are to be sold by William Bladen at the signe of the Bible at the great north dore of Paules,London,1619,"Balmford, James, b. 1556. --  Short and plaine dialogue concerning the unlawfulnes of playing at cards or tables, or any other game consisting in chance.; Gambling --  Religious aspects --  Early works to 1800."

A08075,"Newes from the low-countreyes. Or The anatomy of Caluinisticall calumnyes, manifested in a dialogue betweene a Brabander, and a Hollander Vpon occasion of a placcart, lately published in Holla[n]d, against the Iesuites, priests, friars &c. by those that there assume vnto themselues, the tytle of the high-mighty-lords, the States &c. Translated out of the Netherland language, into English. By D.N.","D. N., fl. 1622.; Cresswell, Joseph, 1556-1623, attributed name.; Verstegan, Richard, ca. 1550-1640.",English College Press,Saint Omer,1622,Jesuits --  Netherlands --  Early works to 1800.

A07215,"The anatomie of sorcerie VVherein the wicked impietie of charmers, inchanters, and such like, is discouered and confuted. By Iames Mason, Master of Artes.","Mason, James, M.A.",By Iohn Legatte printer to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge 1612 And are to be sold in Pauls Church yard at the signe of the Crowne by Simon Waterson,Printed at London,1612,Witchcraft --  Early works to 1800.

Plagues
A18922,"Henoch Clapham his demaundes and answeres touching the pestilence methodically handled, as his time and meanes could permit.","Clapham, Henoch.; Re., Pere.",Printed by Richard Schilders,Middelburg,1604,Epidemics --  England --  Early works to 1800.; Plague --  Early works to 1800.

A13996,"A discourse of death, bodily, ghostly, and eternall nor vnfit for souldiers warring, seamen sayling, strangers trauelling, women bearing, nor any other liuing that thinkes of dying. By Thomas Tuke.","Tuke, Thomas, d. 1657.",Printed by William Stansbie for George Norton,London,1613,Death --  Religious aspects --  Early works to 1800.

A34110,"Naturall philosophie reformed by divine light, or, A synopsis of physicks by J.A. Comenius ... ; with a briefe appendix touching the diseases of the body, mind, and soul, with their generall remedies, by the same author.","Comenius, Johann Amos, 1592-1670.",Printed by Robert and William Leybourn for Thomas Pierrepont,London,1651,Physics --  Early works to 1800.; Science --  Early works to 1800.

A34114,"A reformation of schooles designed in two excellent treatises, the first whereof summarily sheweth, the great necessity of a generall reformation of common learning : what grounds of hope there are for such a reformation : how it may be brought to passe : the second answers certain objections ordinarily made against such undertakings, and describes the severall parts and titles of workes which are shortly to follow / written ... in Latine by ... John Amos Comenius ... ; and now ... translated into English ... by Samuel Hartlib ...","Comenius, Johann Amos, 1592-1670.; Hartlib, Samuel, d. 1662.",Printed for Michael Sparke,London,1642,Education --  Early works to 1800.; Schools --  England.; Schools --  Early works to 1800.


A12262,"Samsons seaven lockes of haire allegorically expounded, and compared to the seauen spirituall vertues, whereby we are able to ouercome our spirituall Philistims. By M. A. Symson, minister of the euangell at Dalkeith.","Simson, Archibald, 1564-1628.",By Edward Raban printer to the Vniversitie,Printed at Sainct Andrewes,1621,Virtues --  Early works to 1800.
