<p>255</p>

<p>ever is found to be irreconcilably at variance with love, or fidelity, or help, or society, that is, with the objects of the original institution; as Selden proves, and as I have myself shown in another treatise<sup>4</sup> from several texts of Scripture. For it would have been absurd, when the Pharisees asked, whether it was allowable to put away a wife for every cause, to answer, that it was not lawful except in case of adultery, when it was well known already to be not only lawful but necessary to put away an adulteress, and that not by divorce, but by death. Fornication, therefore, must be here understood in a much wider sense than that of simple adultery, as is clear from many passages of Scripture, and particularly from Judg. xix. 2. <em>his concubine played the whore against him;</em> not by committing adultery, for in that case she would not have dared to flee to her father's house, but by refractory behaviour towards her husband.<sup>5</sup> Nor could Paul have allowed divorce in consequence of</p>

<p>261</p>

<p>T<small>HE SIN WHICH IS COMMON TO ALL MEN IS THAT WHICH OUR FIRST PARENTS, AND IN THEM ALL THEIR POSTERITY COMMITTED,</small><sup>6</sup> <small>WHEN, CASTING OFF THEIR OBEDIENCE TO GOD, THEY TASTED THE FRUIT OF THE FORBIDDEN TREE.</small></p>

<p>O<small>UR FIRST PARENTS.</small> Gen. iii. 6. <em>the woman took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat.</em> Hence 1 Tim. ii. 14. <em>Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the transgression.</em> This sin originated, first, in the instigation of the devil, as is clear from the narrative in Gen. iii. and from 1 John iii. 8. <em>he that committeth sin is of the devil, for the devil sinneth from the beginning.</em> Secondly, in the liability to fall with which man was created,<sup>7</sup> whereby he, as the devil had done before him, <em>abode not in the truth,</em> John viii. 44. nor <em>kept his first estate, but left his own habitation,</em> Jude 6. If the circumstances of this crime are duly considered, it will be acknowledged to have been a most heinous offence, and a transgression of the whole law. For what sin can be named, which was not included in this one act? It comprehended at once distrust in the divine veracity, and a proportionate credulity in the assurances of Satan; unbelief; ingratitude; disobedience; gluttony;<sup>8</sup></p>

<p>262</p>

<p>in the man excessive uxoriousness, in the woman a want of proper regard for her husband, in both an insensibility to the welfare of their offspring, and that offspring the whole human race; parricide, theft, invasion of the rights of others, sacrilege, deceit, presumption in aspiring to divine attributes, fraud in the means employed to attain the object, pride, and arrogance.<sup>9</sup> Whence it is said, Eccles. vii. 29. <em>God hath made man upright, but they have sought out many inventions.</em> James ii. 10. <em>whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.</em></p>

<p>A<small>ND IN THEM ALL THEIR POSTERITY</small>; for even such as were not then born are judged and condemned in them, Gen. iii. 16, &c. so that without doubt they also sinned in them, and at the same time with them. Rom. v. 12. <em>by one man sin entered into the world.</em> v. 15. <em>through the offence of one many be dead;</em> and v. 16. <em>the judgement was by one to condemnation;</em> v. 17. <em>by one man's offence death reigned by one;</em> and v. 18. <em>by the offence of one man judgement came upon all men to condemnation;</em> and v. 19. <em>by one man's disobedience many were made sinners.</em> 1 Cor. xv. 22. <em>in Adam all die;</em> undoubtedly therefore all sinned in Adam. For Adam being the common parent and head of all, it follows that, as in the covenant, that is, in receiving the commandment of God, so also in the defection from God, he either stood</p>